With Pentecost tomorrow,
I believe our killer
will be compelled to act.
We plan on using a decoy.
Do not betray your own kind,
Roosevelt.
You'll find yourself
with no friends.
You have no right to live
among decent people.
I'm a Van Bergen!
You're a nobody!
You don't have the courage
to see yourself
for who you really are
because you're a coward.
I can take you away.
Stop him!
Cyrus?
- Where is he?
- He got away.
Is that closer, Stevie?
No.
That ain't him neither.
Are you quite sure the eyes
weren't further apart?
No. I told you.
The eyes were bunched up.
The forehead was as big
as a wall.
That could have been the angle
you saw him from.
- He was a tall man.
- Don't put words in his mouth.
The one thing I know better
than you is how to draw.
The drawings may be yours,
but it's Stevie who saw
the man's face, not you.
Listen to what he tells you.
Don't tell him what he saw.
He's telling me what he saw.
But you're not listening.
You're drawing
what you want to draw.
Why don't you draw it, then?
All that's required is you put
aside your preconceived notions
of who the killer is and just
listen to what's being...
I am listening!
Stop!
Stop it!
We ain't gonna find nobody
like this.
Doctor, do you not find it
ironic that an immigrant child
was left at the foot
of Lady Liberty herself?!
Doctor!
You can't be in here.
Mr. Tuthill, it's all right.
They're here at my request.
Has the child been identified?
His name is Ernst Lohmann.
He called himself Rosie.
He worked at the brothel
we were watching.
As we've observed
with the others,
removal of the genitalia,
severing of the right hand
above the wrist,
both ulna and radius
cleanly cut,
massive damage to the thorax,
with lateral lacerations
to the abdomen.
He only cut out one eye.
Perhaps he was interrupted.
He's taken his heart.
That's new.
Also, he's removed
this section of scalp
covering the parietal bone.
Scalped.
I've only ever seen the likes
of that out West.
What did you say?
I saw something similar when
I was ranching in the Dakotas.
I had the misfortune
to look upon the corpses
of several white men mutilated
after an Indian massacre.
Look at the body, please.
Are you sure what you saw
was similar?
Similar, yes.
The eyes.
The lower parts.
Of course.
After you've finished,
re-examine the correspondence
we received from the mental
hospitals, the asylums.
Look for any mention of patients
with a connection to the West...
Indians, settlers,
laborers on the railroad.
We make no distinction...
not yet.
Miss Howard will be needed
to assist them.
Now if I may have a moment
alone.
You who have no children.
You have no soul.
He has no children of his own,
so he must use the children of
others to prove his crazy ideas!
Our children!
Get in.
Good morning, gentlemen.
What happened?
Another kid was gutted, this
time right under our noses.
It wasn't Van Bergen
what done it.
Not him?
Uh, the... the... the timing.
It... don't fit right.
He was already...
He was already what?
Well, speak up, man.
'Twas an accident.
What did you do to him?!
Keep an eye on him, I said!
What do I pay you for, anyway?!
Jesus!
Don't worry.
Chief, he won't be found.
I took care of it!
Let me tell you how this city
is run, you stupid mick.
We serve the rich.
And in return, they raise us
above the primordial filth.
And God help us if we don't keep
our end of the bargain.
You see, to them...
...you and me are nothing
but dumb animals...
...no better than the lowlifes
and the tenement scum
we protect them from.
It don't matter that they...
that they got soft hands
and that they dress
in silk bloomers.
So long as they have money,
we do their bidding.
And if you don't, they'll pay
someone twice your size
to sink you to the bottom
of the river,
like you no doubt done
to their son.
Chief.
So don't tell me that
you bloody took care of it.
Can I drop you gentlemen
somewhere?
The Natural History Museum
if it's convenient.
- 77th and...
- I know where it is.
West 77th and Central Park,
Jack.
You got it, boss.
I once read a monograph
you wrote.
I even understood some of it.
Is that what we're here
to discuss?
"The Harm We Do to Our Children
Is Revisited on Ourselves."
Catchy title.
Have you children, Mr. Kelly?
I count all the poor
of the Five Points as mine.
Abused by their betters,
swindled by Wall Street,
shunned by the swells
on Millionaires Row.
I was proud of my people
back there.
They've gotten off their knees
for once.
But you know how mobs can be.
Arranged by yourself, no doubt.
Oh.
You're looking a little more
chipper than last time we met.
Where was that again?
In this case,
what do we owe you for the ride,
other than our gratitude?
Whoa there!
Well, now that you're asking...
...you could deliver
a gentle word
into the ear of your friend
Mr. Roosevelt.
He keeps my brothels shut down
any longer,
and he will have hell to to pay.
You can let him know... the
rioting today was just a taster.
It was our idea to close
the brothels, Mr. Kelly.
Sure.
I know.
And I applaud your efforts.
So let me tell you, Doctor.
You are fighting a monster,
one that reaches
from Millionaires' Mile
all the way down
to Mulberry Street.
And if you're not careful,
it will devour you long before
you find your child killer.
Excuse us
for being late, Miss Howard.
Let's get started.
Here's the correspondence
from the mental hospitals
that the doctor wanted us
to re-examine.
Shall we?
I hope you're not implying
the native customs
have anything to do
with these murders.
I mean, we have got
already enough trouble
changing the public view
of the natives.
That's what we've come
to find out, Franz.
My own knowledge
about the Plains tribes
is poorly inefficient,
but I have a young colleague
who may be able to help you.
What is it?
A detailed description,
uh, from an asylum inmate
who witnessed the battlefield
after Little Bighorn.
Well, read it aloud.
He's too old to be our man.
Besides, he's still locked up.
Please don't look at me
like that.
Or each other.
"The bodies were heaped
around four great boulders.
I saw eyeballs torn out
and smeared on the rocks.
Brains too.
Noses and ears were hacked off
and entrails exposed.
General Custer's body lay
in the middle of the carnage.
His thighs had been slashed
to the bone, his ears slit.
And at least a dozen arrows
pierced his groin."
Castration and mutilation
of the genitals
were quite common.
The Sioux believed that
each man's nagi, his spirit,
entered the afterlife
in the exact same form
he left the world at his death.
So if a warrior truly hated
his enemy,
he'd chop off his manhood
to prevent him from enjoying
the pleasures of copulation
in the spirit world.
Spirits copulate?
I, uh, suppose there's
not much else to do.
Hm.
What about the eyes?
The belief is the nagi has to
take a perilous journey
to reach the spirit world.
If the eyes are missing,
they can't find their way
and thus will be forced
to return to our world
and wander forever
as a lost and forlorn ghost.
Of course,
that's one big difference
with the mutilations
you're investigating.
And that is?
Children.
No self-respecting Plains Indian
would ever commit
this kind of ritual mutilation
on a child.
It would mean admitting you
considered the child a threat,
and that would be deemed, uh,
shameful and cowardly.
Then you don't believe
that our mutilations
were part of an Indian ritual?
To anyone who understands
the culture, most decidedly not.
What about someone who doesn't
understand the culture,
someone who has perhaps
witnessed mutilations
such as these
without knowing what they mean?
Then I'd say they would apply
to them their own meaning.
"Dirtier than a red Injun."
It's in the letter he wrote
to Mrs. Santorelli.
He's witnessed these things,
probably as a child,
since there's been no account
of a massacre for 20 years.
Not by Indians, anyway.
And Van Bergen was never
out West.
Exactly.
We blundered last night, John,
but we're getting closer.
Miss Joanna?
I'm glad you were able
to get here so quickly.
Miss Joanna would make you
Mr. Laszlo.
Miss Crawford.
How is he?
He was asking
if you'd been to visit.
I brought him some food.
The fare at hospitals
can be less than flavorful.
Cyrus told me
you've found employment.
Yes, at The Philadelphia
Tribune.
Excellent.
They only pay me by the article,
but I'll be able
to reimburse you soon.
The money I gave Cyrus
for your education
requires no repayment.
The service he's provided me
over the years
is quite sufficient.
You mean nearly getting himself
killed?
I see I have offended you
without knowing why.
You could have released him from
your services a long time ago.
That was your decision to make.
I have as much need of him
as he has of me.
More, I'd say.
I was speaking of friendship.
Your friend spends most
of his time in the stables.
My uncle may take
acts of kindness
as a mark of your decency,
but I see keeping him
downtrodden
through courtesy
and progressive ideas
as simply more effective
than using shackles and a whip.
Thank you for letting me know
about my uncle, Doctor.
And thank you as well
for paying for my schooling.
I still intend to reimburse you.
- Here's another one.
- In the same hospital?
Of the patients who match
our description
that have spent time in
the West, these four were sent
to St. Elizabeth's Hospital
in Washington.
Look at this one.
Rudolf Bunzl...
released and later committed
to Blackwell's Island
right here in the city.
That means they'll have records
on him.
I've asked Mary
to vacate her room
so you'd have a more comfortable
place to convalesce.
Mm.
I'd like to thank you both
for your help.
Frankly, it was more than help.
You've put yourselves
at great risk.
What I mean to say is that I
take responsibility for the fact
that you came so close to...
What I really mean to say
is that, uh...
I apologize.
I feel I've taken your loyalty
and trust for granted.
Doctor.
You don't have to apologize.
Right, Stevie?
Right.
Well...
...I hope you'll be comfortable.
Egg cream, please.
Mm-hmm.
Coming up.
John.
John?
Laszlo?
You've been chloroformed.
I could smell it
when I got in the wagon.
By whom, I don't know.
Whoa!
What happened to your uniform,
Captain?
Go on.
Get, society boy.
Well, Laszlo,
it seems we find ourselves
in the presence
of a great many sainted men.
Dr. Kreizler, we are
aware of your investigation
and demand that you
and your colleagues desist.
Yes.
Bishop Potter, I wonder why you,
a leader of the church
and a pillar of the community,
would want to stop us
in our quest
to find the perpetrator
of these terrible murders.
Because it's a matter
for the police.
The man responsible
for these crimes
has been active for some time,
but the police seem to be unable
or unwilling to stop him.
Some of the victims were killed
during your tenure, Mr. Byrnes.
Not a day goes by in this city
without some little grifter
being found dead on misery lane.
Murder is murder.
Not when it leads to the door
of an innocent man.
Willem Van Bergen did not commit
these murders.
Of that I'm quite certain.
Oh, no. That's a lie.
He don't believe that.
No, you and criminals
like Paul Kelly,
along with the agitators and
the socialists on his payroll,
are subverting the law.
My only concern is that
of seven dead children.
Gentlemen.
Do you know why I collect art?
It persuades me that the world
is a more beautiful place
than I know it to be.
I take comfort
in that which I can understand.
And a man who kills
for no apparent reason
is beyond my comprehension.
Mr. Morgan...
...you are a pioneer
in your field.
You've turned finance
into a science.
I hope to do the same
for the human mind,
criminal or otherwise.
By looking at the man's methods,
his appetites, and his victims,
I believe I can build
a clear enough picture
to understand his motives
and thereby capture him.
Hm.
Bishop Potter, may I suggest
that you take your leave
and talk to the family
of the boy in question?
Let them know that their son
is no longer under suspicion.
It's the least we can do...
...seeing as how
these false accusations
have forced the boy to flee
the country.
Mr. Byrnes, why don't you
accompany the bishop?
I'm sure the family
would like a reassuring word
from you as well.
Hmm?
Doctor, your beliefs...
are interesting.
I believe there are two reasons
why a man does what he does...
the good reason
and the real reason.
Then why don't you tell us
the real reason
why you forced us here?
This city is changing.
In four years' time, we'll be
entering the 20th century,
and New York is poised to become
the greatest economic powerhouse
this world has ever seen.
But to do so...
...we need
a compliant workforce.
The civil unrest caused
by these murders
troubles me a great deal...
a great deal indeed.
Possibly even more
than the murders themselves.
A harsh truth
but a truth nonetheless.
Would you like a lemonade,
Mr. Moore?
No.
Thank you.
What happened?
It looks as though
that fat son of a bitch
is going to let that alienist
continue with his investigation.
They suspect something.
I know it.
Well, you'd better hope
that it stays a suspicion.
Let's go!
Better get the Swede back.
Tell him to bring more
than chloroform this time.
Gentlemen,
you have made yourself
a very wide variety
of very powerful enemies
in a very short period of time.
Now, I can offer you
no public support,
but a quick resolution
to this sordid affair
is in everyone's best interest.
Therefore,
if you should find yourself
in need of any resources in
your quest to find this man...
Thank you, Mr. Morgan,
but there would be no advantage
to our investigation to have
your financial involvement,
especially if it were ever
to be made public.
I see.
Hm.
Mm-hmm.
You gentlemen have yourselves
a good day.
Why would you turn down his
offer if he wants to help you?
Men such as J.P. Morgan
are only capable of doing
what they perceive to be
in their best interest.
You don't take something
from people like that
without them expecting something
in return.
But what could a man
like J.P. Morgan want from you?
I don't know.
But I'm most unwilling
to find out.
Help me.
I'm not crazy. Help me.
Miss!
Help me!
You're Miss Howard from
Commissioner Roosevelt's office?
Yes.
You wrote a letter
some time back
making inquires about patients,
I believe.
Yes.
And we have no one here who fit
the parameters of your search.
At the time, no.
However, upon looking
through correspondence
from another hospital, it
appears there's a patient here
who matches certain
other reference points.
St. Elizabeth's.
Rudolf Bunzl.
Mr. Bunzl was released
six years ago.
May I see his records?
Blackwell's male patients have
been moved to another facility
and all records along with them.
I'm afraid I couldn't say where
Mr. Bunzl's file is right now.
You could ask St. Elizabeth's
for their records.
Excuse me.
Can I ask why St. Elizabeth's
receives patients
from the Western states
and territories?
You work directly
for Commissioner Roosevelt?
I do.
Because it's
a government hospital.
Pardon me?
St. Elizabeth's...
Its official name
is the Government Hospital
for the Insane,
but it's referred to
as St. Elizabeth's
out of courtesy
for its patients.
And who are its patients?
Soldiers and sailors
deemed unfit for service
due to mental problems.
Soldiers?
Yes.
Sent from out West?
Some.
Thank you.
Mary?
I've been thinking
of the circumstances
in which you live...
that is, in which we live.
I have no doubt that what
happened early in your life
was the result of events
that provoked
an aberrant outburst of violence
on your part.
However, I believe
that is behind you.
So I wonder if it might be
best for you...
...to strike out on your own.
You're a woman now...
...and capable of living
by yourself.
Sara.
He's a soldier.
What?
I think he may have been
a soldier.
I went to Blackwell's Island
today.
That must have been difficult.
Are you all right?
Yes.
Thank you.
I went there
to ask after a patient,
a man with a history of violence
toward children.
He was once committed to
a mental hospital in Washington,
sent there from out West.
I don't see the connection.
St. Elizabeth's
is the Government Hospital
for the Insane.
It's where they send soldiers
and sailors
deemed unfit for duty.
What did you find out?
He was released from Blackwell
six years ago.
I rang St. Elizabeth's and asked
them to tell me more about him,
but they wouldn't provide any
information over the telephone.
I propose that I go there
in person.
- Have you told Kreizler?
- You'll have to tell him.
Come on, then.
We'll go together.
No.
Sara, what's wrong?
Has something happened
between you?
He was right about one thing.
Given certain circumstances,
we're all capable of violence.
Did he hurt you?
Ezra?
Ezra!
Where did you get this?
A knife is not a toy.
Just couldn't sleep?
Come on.
He likes you.
Let's put him to bed.
I'm sorry.
Am I interrupting?
John.
John, this is Ezra.
Hello, Ezra.
Think you can sleep now?
Well, then good night.
What's the matter, John?
You seem disquieted
by something.
What did you do to her?
- To whom?
- Sara.
I'm sure I don't know
what you're talking about.
What happened?
That's why you've come...
to ask me about Sara?
I've come to tell you
it's possible our killer
was once a solider out West.
How did you arrive at this?
Sara.
She intends to go to Washington
to continue investigating.
It would only draw attention
to Roosevelt.
We'll make the trip ourselves.
Tell me what happened
between you.
Sara felt entitled to bring up
certain things...
personal things that I would
rather not discuss with you.
May I remind you it was I
that introduced you?
Yes... our handsome but indolent
mutual friend.
Is that what you think of me?
No.
It's what Sara thinks of you.
I'm sorry to say it, John,
but I'm afraid that's all
she'll ever think of you.
She's far too kind to say it, so
it's best you hear it from me.
Be careful, Laszlo...
or you're going to end up
a lonely old man.
Come on! Knock him out!
Twenty on Eat 'Em Up Jack.
Okay.
Come on, Jack!
Eat 'em up!
Yo ho!
Yeah!
You lost, society boy?
Wandered out
of your own neighborhood?
Then again...
...you seem to like it
down here...
...with all the fairies
and the sodomites.
Must be a fairy yourself, huh?
Am I right?
Look at me.
Look at me!
You're in well over your head,
you and that alienist.
Do you hear me?
You don't scare me, Connor.
Mary...
...after all that's happened
in the past 24 hours, I...
If it's not a presumption, I...
...I'd very much like
if you would join me for dinner.
Please sit closer.
I don't know why I didn't ask
before.
This is "O Patria Mia" from...
from Verdi's "Aida."
Of course you know that.